big hello from portland oregon welcome
to another episode of b2b marketing and
more
we are going to talk about innovations
today my guest today is carla johnson
and she is a marketing and innovation
strategist kino and the author of 10
books i can barely finish three and half
books and she has 10 books all right her
latest book is rethink innovation
and it's about you know what i'm just
going to have kala talk about this all
right carla welcome to my show
damn hello in portland i'm from denver
yeah so we're not too far away from each
other no not at all and he has a direct
flight
exactly exactly talk to us about your
latest book rethink innovation and what
is that book about i spent the last five
years or five years before my book was
released digging into
whether or not the ability to learn how
to consistently come up with great ideas
is something that could be learned and
taught okay and the reason that i went
down this rabbit hole is because i had
so many marketers and even sales people
say to me
you know i i'd like to see these
creative things but i'm just not
creative myself that's just not the kind
of person i am
and you know you go back to when we're
kids and i can imagine you as a kid in
the art room you know you're you're
creative you're doing all these things
you don't have any
apprehension there's no self-judgment
all of these things we're super creative
but then as we go through school the
kind of things that we're taught and
rewarded for are more about following
the norm following processes everybody
thinking the same
and then you go through university and
it's very structured you get into the
work world and really the way that you
scale a business is by taking out
inefficiencies and a lot of times
creativity and innovative thinking are
considered inefficiencies
and so we end up with adults in our
careers who think we aren't creative or
innovative thinkers so that's what i
looked at i did research i did
interviews i used my own clients as
guinea pigs and i looked at what is the
process that some of the most prolific
innovators use to consistently come up
with great ideas that have an actual
bottom line impact and it's that process
the five step process that's the
foundation of my book rethink innovation
which essentially teaches people that
innovation is everybody's business and
then here's five steps about how you do
it fantastic so the one of the key
takeaway innovation is everybody's
business i think that's especially true
in today's world however innovations
mean different things to different
people some people think is like oh this
is a big idea and some people think that
you know i'm making innovative steps to
actually improve our product so how do
you define innovation and how is
innovation different from creativity you
hit on something really important there
is that innovation can feel like this
huge overwhelming thing and especially
when we hear so much in business about
disruptive innovation and we think that
to be truly innovative it has to be
something that turns an industry
completely upside down you know like
apple did with music like uber did with
transportation
and things like that but the truth is 90
of innovation happens outside of that
traditional
product development part of the business
so if that's the case we're really
looking at low-hanging fruit with the
entire 90 of the rest of the
organization
so what we need to look at is how we can
change that perception how we can
rethink innovation and how we define it
because most people think it's it's
really complex they think it's time
consuming
and to be honest they don't actually
know how to do it which is kind of weird
because so many companies have
innovation as a core value so they're
asking people to behave in a way that
people don't even know what it is back
to that definition to your point so i
define innovation as the ability to
consistently
come up with new great and reliable
ideas
it sounds like a very simple definition
but each of those words is really
important so a new idea doesn't have to
be new and never ever done before in the
world but it's something that's new to
your industry to your line business to
your vertical
so for example
mcdonald's studied the layout and design
of a formula one pit stop and then they
use that as inspiration for their
drive-through food service area to
standardize it to make a quicker and
faster turnaround exactly so was it
absolutely new and never been done
before
no but they took inspiration from
another industry and they brought it
into their own but that new idea isn't
enough just to be innovative because
we've seen all sorts of failures just
because it was a new idea i mean look at
new coke you know that wasn't
necessarily innovative on its own that
did not help yes i hear you
next characteristic is that it's a great
idea and and i'll be honest pam this
criteria is a little bit more subjective
yeah but i think about what david oh
will be how he describes a great idea
it's one of those that makes you
a little envious and kind of jealous
that you didn't think of it yourself you
hear it you go oh man that's so great
yeah i wish i hadn't thought of that you
know maybe the
oh my god why did i think of it yeah
that happens all the time even a new and
a great idea aren't you enough to be
innovative and it takes that third
characteristic and that's a reliable
idea and a reliable idea to make it
innovative is something that actually
has a financial impact on the business
it doesn't necessarily mean it has to be
this disruptive
skyrocketing growth overnight but it
could be those kind of incremental
tweaks here and there that help generate
a little more revenue to help save a
little more
time money efficiency expense here
optimization the improvement part of it
exactly it's it's that consistency
because a lot of times what makes a
truly innovative organization is that
there's all of these employees
consistently looking for opportunities
to implement new great and reliable
ideas and that's that fourth
characteristic of consistency
and that's really the difference between
those you know
one hit wonders with a great idea and
those people who are truly perpetually
innovative is that they're able to
consistently come up with ideas that are
new great and reliable and and to
implement those that's how i define
innovation because it's something that
everybody can relate to yeah and it
removes that complexity it removes the
it has to be massively time consuming
and then the five-step process that i've
developed gives people a specific
process to follow so that they know how
to do it sometimes i equate innovation
with creativity what is your thought on
that you can't have innovation
without creativity that's for sure and
it's an interesting dynamic because
lots of businesses look at creativity
and they think of it as oh it's nice to
have oh isn't that creative but they
limit it really to like the graphic
designers in the marketing department or
even the marketing department themselves
and then they they act like okay now
we're getting down to serious business
we don't need the creatives in here we
need innovation and so you can't have
innovation without creativity because
creativity is a lot about originality
creativity is kind of like a fuel to the
innovation in a way in a way you could
almost look at creativity as a lost
leader but it drives innovation and
innovation is really when you take those
ideas and you put them into a process
you're able to implement them measure
them you have a specific outcome or
you're working toward that
not every idea is implementable but i
think there's also the dynamic where
there's a perception that coming up with
the idea is the easy part executing it's
the hard part
but what people miss is that you need to
start out with a better idea in the
first place
and also you need ideas all the way
through execution and implementation so
it's that ability to be able to connect
the dots and take learnings from other
experiences that you have other
industries other situations and
understand how to apply that into the
work that you do really every single day
and you mentioned there are five steps
that people can take can you also talk
to us about that
i will start first with the five step
process
and it's called the perpetual innovation
process and the reason i call it that is
because this is the process that these
perpetually innovative
people used over and over and over again
and it was really interesting pam is i
would talk to somebody about this is an
amazing idea that you had campaign had
phenomenal outcomes tell me how you came
up with that idea and they would say you
know i don't know it just came to me so
what i realized is that i needed to go
to that end result and say what were you
doing before that and what did you do
before that and reverse engineer it
reverse engineer back yes i was going to
say that yeah yeah because in a lot of
cases like even with you if i said you
know how did you come up with the idea
for your last book maybe you could go
back to that initial bit of inspiration
but a lot of people couldn't just off
the top of their head and so by reverse
engineering it what i found through all
of these interviews and through this
research
is that everybody followed the same
process whether they realized it or not
so then when i went back to the people
who i had asked where they got the idea
the inspiration for their idea and i
walked them through this process they
said yeah that actually is what i do
every single time i just didn't realize
it
and so the five-step process that people
use is first they observe
second they distill
third they relate fourth they generate
and fifth they pitch
so when we break down each of these
steps the first step is observe and it's
interesting and i know that you've
noticed this especially with creative
people they're highly highly observant
of these little minutiae details that a
lot of us miss and you know what it's
right here in our hand is a big culprit
it's my smartphone and it's our
attention gets narrowed
into
these very small
tasks or digital devices all day long
but really creative and especially
innovative people are highly highly
observant to the world around them
and if we go back to that childhood
where kids are in art class it's crazy
the things that they notice and what
they observe and if you've ever been
around a young child the things that
come out of their mouth you're like oh
my gosh you know how did they notice it
now they're telling the world about it
it's something that's very natural to us
but we learn just to filter out all of
these things or we let digital devices
absorb all of our attention but it's
time that we
relearn how to use all five of our
senses and observe the world around us
so then we go from observation
into the next step which is distill
and in the second step we're distilling
all of these things that we have
observed
into patterns
and what those patterns look like can be
completely random completely
don't seem to make sense but the
interesting thing that i found through
my research
is that especially these first two steps
of observing and distilling they're very
genetically natural to us
as humans as a part of survival so if
you think clear back to our ancestors
the reason that they were able to
survive and lead to our lineage is
because they were very good at observing
the world around them they would go out
on the savannah and they would observe
are birds very calm and just hanging out
in the trees and or the antelope grazing
and chilling
or the antelope running by fast and the
birds are flying away and and so they're
observing all of these things and
distilling them into patterns patterns
of safety patterns of danger patterns of
weather changing and things like that
so once people start to reawaken their
ability to observe
your brain will naturally distill it
into these patterns and then the third
step i think is almost the most
important because even if people start
to observe and distill
unless they understand how to relate it
into the work that they do
their new ideas can still come across as
copycat or cut and paste from what
another brand is doing
and relate is really looking at those
patterns that you've distilled
and relate those patterns into the work
that you're doing so for example
you and i have a great friend named tim
washer
and tim is a comedian super funny i love
him
he is he's hilarious he's hilarious you
know and he's worked with some of the
best of the best conan o'brien he was a
writer for amy poehler on saturday night
live we can update you know that level
of comedian he was a creative director
at cisco for a while and he had a new
product launch to do and you know like a
technology company you don't think of
them as doing
amazingly creative and innovative
product launches it's usually an
executive or an engineer talking about
the features and all of the new things
that customers can do because of this
product
but tim said let's do something really
different and innovative
then he happened to be in a comedy club
in new york city one night and the
comedian ray romano was on stage
and tim kind of sat back in his chair
and he really observed the whole
audience not just ray
as a comedian and a performer
but he said as he watched it he observed
how ray moved on the stage and he
observed the body responses and how
people began to lean in as ray went
through his routine ray talked about
things like
family and in-laws and kids and and all
of these things that people could really
relate to in a short amount of time
but all through humor
and as ray got people to laugh
in the audience everybody's emotional
wall started to go down
as tim looked at that
all of these things that he observed he
distilled it into patterns patterns of
being able to build relationships very
quickly with people that most likely ray
didn't know i mean they knew of him
and then talking about things that were
very familiar doing it with humor and it
was this laughter that got people to
lower their emotional walls and be
willing to hear things that they
normally wouldn't hear
so it was those patterns that he related
into his work now the next step is
generate and generating ideas so now
when tim went to generate an idea for
this product launch he said how can we
use humor
to talk about something that everybody
knows but in a way that gets them to
laugh and lower their emotional walls
and that's how he used humor to do a
video for the product launch which
happened to come out right around
valentine's day
and so instead of having an engineer
talk about how fantastic the asr 9000
router is
he made it into a valentine's day video
that talked about the asr 9000 router
being the perfect valentine's day gift
and you think about putting this router
right up there with diamonds and jewelry
and flowers it worked fantastic
i certainly stand out
exactly exactly but because he was able
to tell the story of what he observed
the patterns he noticed how that related
into the work how that generated his
idea that was his pitch the pitch is
actually to go back and walk through
each of these steps and you have a
natural story structure to it and this
is what works so well for tim
in general when people try to come up
with consistent and reliable ideas for
these five
steps do you actually have any insight
in terms of where people spend the most
time subconsciously or unconsciously if
people don't understand the five steps
the place that they spend the most time
on
is generate we need something we need
something now that spends time
generating it
let's brainstorm like throw it all up on
the wall and you know what happens it's
disjointed it's weird
nothing really great ever comes out of
it it's either something that's a rehash
or it's been watered down so much that
it's not really unique creative
innovative at all
and so when people go back
and they do these first three steps they
find that the generate step
then happens like this so automatically
and instead of spending all of this time
in the generate step
to have something to pitch that's really
crappy to be honest
they go back and and they start to
observe and the interesting thing about
this is to your question where do people
start to spend the most time
it's hard to tell because once you
remind your brain
to observe things around you you do it
so much all the time that you don't even
realize you're doing it and your brain
will start to do the observe and distill
so fast you don't keep track of it
because you just are a more observant
person but i think the piece where the
reward pays off the most
is the relate step
and that's where you really look at what
worked in these other scenarios and how
do i really make it apply
to what i'm trying to accomplish with
whatever my charge is right now you know
i knew a new campaign a new strategy a
new whatever that may be
because it's that ability to understand
how to take what worked behind another
provocative idea or situation and truly
related into your own work like tim did
that really shows that extraordinary
idea
in your book you also mentioned about we
can be a different types of innovators
yeah what are they why are understanding
what type of innovator you are
critical
what i've seen with other types of
innovation work is that they talk about
the type of person or the role
throughout the innovation process
and i think the interesting thing about
that is that
lots of us have to be involved in
executing our ideas all the way through
it's not just that we put on a different
hat at a different stage we are who we
are
and how people come to the table with
ideas can be very very different and in
order to get those ideas out the door
and executed
we have to understand how people look at
ideas because i come from a family of
very left-brained engineers and i'm very
right-brained now am i a better or worse
innovator because i'm ripening versus
left brain no it's just that i'm
different
and so when you look at the difference
even between like a bill gates and a
steve jobs they are very different even
though both are not innovators but they
approach things differently and they
probably are different arch types too so
the difference between an archetype
and a role is that an archetype is
that's how you were born so if you think
about
somebody who says you know we really
need to figure out how this is going to
work across our team and somebody says
well let's ask pam because pam is such a
people person
now that's not your job title right your
job title doesn't say pam a people
person but that's who you are your
personality trade exactly exactly this
this is how you show up in the world
and a role is more this is a behavior
that we want you to perform based on
your job title
and so when we look at archetypes there
are certain people who are just
naturally more strategic they can see
the blueprint and know what needs to be
done and get it out the door just like
that i call it their natural geniuses
strategy and planning so i think that's
something that's more commonly
understood when it comes to innovation
and the value of that role
now the next one is a collaborator
and a collaborator is one who's just
excellent at being able to bring people
together on different teams across the
organization even collaborating within
the same team because there's people
with different dynamics on the same team
and we look at that and that is so
important when it comes to ideas into
innovation and making them actually
happen because a lot of times why an
idea doesn't go anywhere is because
people are butting heads and there's not
collaboration
now the third one
is the culture shaper and they are
fantastic at communicating change and
and when we look at especially in
marketing there's more of an
appreciation for storytellers and that
rise of change and how they actually
structure the narrative of what's going
to happen so when we look at it in the
context of innovation
we're looking at that culture shaper as
someone who can
plan that narrative that story about
where are we today where do we want to
go and how do we get to where we're
going so that people understand that
they do have a role and a part in
whatever is being done
now the fourth one is a psychologist
and a psychologist is somebody who has
such empathy that's their natural genius
they understand in a way what it's like
to be the consumer of an idea and they
look at it from the people side of
things and how will it be to use this
idea whether that idea is a product
whether it's a process
whatever it may be they really bring
that human element into this world of
innovation in in a way
they focus on unstructured innovation
other than the processes and things that
are very considered hard and rigid or
you know process oriented they're very
much about the people part of innovation
now the fifth one
is an orchestrator and their natural
genius is that they are fearless leaders
you see this in organizations many times
especially team dynamics you can see an
issue that goes
from early later later later into the
process and everybody knows there's a
conversation that needs to be had but
nobody wants to have it
orchestrators are great at having those
uncomfortable conversations early in the
process and they have this sort of like
sixth sense of understanding how to
navigate all the political stepping
stones within an organization
they're great at you know like a
collaborator reaching across the aisle
and understanding how to work the system
so that innovation can actually happen
and then the last one is a provocateur
in pam i'm guessing that's probably you
because the natural juniper provocateur
is someone who's always pushing the
status quo and i think they're easy to
identify in a meeting because they're
the ones who say wait a minute have you
ever thought about you know fill in the
blank have you thought about doing it
this way have you ever looked at this
and people don't usually like to invite
me to the meeting and there's a reason
behind it but when we all start to
understand and appreciate the different
characteristics of these archetypes then
when you have someone like a provocateur
in a meeting it doesn't feel so much
like sandpaper sometimes it's not like
oh here they go here goes pam again
she's got another idea you know you
start to understand
and appreciate how it all works together
and i know sometimes provocateurs really
partner well with strategists because
strategists you know bring some reality
and structure to all of those prolific
ideas that come about and so is anyone
right or wrong no but what we need to
look at is how we bring the dynamics of
how each of these six archetypes think
when we look at how we're more
innovative so that we can
increase the chances that these ideas
will be successful not only in getting
approval but also in execution the six
archetypes and that's great and i
understand on your website there is a
very short assessment that people can
take to identify who they are can tell
you can you talk to us
about that assessment that people can go
to and just like very curiously find out
what
is the architect they belong to if you
go to my website it's carla with the c
carla johnson.co
there's no m just.co and on that home
page you'll see a big area it says find
your innovation archetype and it lists
what the six archetypes are so you can
take the assessment it's about six
questions long then it takes you to a
landing page
and it gives you in-depth information
not only about your own archetype but
how you interact with the other five
archetypes so i always suggest not only
you take it but have your team take it
and talk about the results and how you
see some of these things playing out in
different situations it can be
times when you're going through strategy
planning i know we're early in the year
and that's a big thing it can be when
you're under pressure and need ideas
fast how do you do this you know what it
can be during a time when everything
feels rote and just repetitive and you
really lack inspiration and that's the
case with a lot of teams right now
it feels like we've had our heads down
for so long
and then we've been kind of like locked
down we cannot meet this is really an
interesting way to start to look at how
can we
i i hesitate to say shake things up but
how can we bring greater awareness to
how we function as a team
and maybe infuse some inspiration and
excitement in a way that's different but
doesn't disrupt all of this work that we
still have to have done every day check
out the assessments on carla johnson.co
started with c carla johnson.co and do
your assessments and find out who you
are strategist collaborator culture
shaper
provocateur
psychologist or orchestrator and what
also happens
is people will say actually i see myself
in all of these and it's that there used
to being in situations where they really
need to fill that point of view of
another archetype to be successful now
you as a strategist i can definitely see
and as an orchestrator that's actually
the rarest of all of the archetypes only
eight percent of the people who've taken
the assessment
come out as an orchestrator and when you
do take the assessment on the landing
page it gives you the percentages
yeah i sold that i saw that yeah yeah
and i've had thousands of people take
this assessment and it may vary a
percent or two over time but roughly
those percentage breakdowns that you'll
see in the pie chart on the landing page
does stay true pretty much and i've had
it up about two and a half years do you
actually have any recommendation in
terms of what people can do on a regular
basis to kind of like enhance their
innovation ability
just take five or ten minutes every day
and just sit real still
i'm doing that now i'm kidding use your
five senses and take in observe
everything around you
even if you're sitting in your car
are there little sounds and creaks that
you don't usually notice how does the
seat feel you know i did this in my car
the other day when i was driving and i
thought you know my car's eight years
old the seats don't feel quite like they
did eight years ago and you know you
hear little sounds and
even when you breathe in sometimes
there is a taste that you don't realize
is there so taste doesn't necessarily
even have to be food or drink or
something like that when i'm out in the
in the colorado mountains hiking and you
breathe in you smell that pineness but
you can also taste it a little bit and
sometimes people say i don't have time
to observe or their mind just goes so
much
we are in front of our phone so much and
also in front of our pc so much we are
like green time basically consume us
and i 100 agree with you there are times
we just need to get away and be very
observant in terms of what's actually
happening around us yeah to your point
that the screen time has actually
narrowed our vision to be exactly like
this and so all all of these things can
be happening from here on out and we
don't even notice them because we we've
trained ourselves to have tunnel vision
i know is that sad that is so sad
it's the
clash between efficiency and
productivity and being able to absorb
and have that time i heard
john cleese one time talk about people
say they don't have any time to do these
things he said literally just set a
timer he suggested 15 minutes which i
think also was a great bare minimum
because i know
i know i waste way more than 15 minutes
of my day throughout the day so i know i
can take 15 minutes of it and just sit
and observe and and i tend to do
meditation also even if i just sit
close my eyes and breathe in and out and
you start to notice all of these things
about the tension that you hold in your
body and things like that
lovely i love love love that advice
now i'm going to wrap it up and can you
tell us where we can find your book
you can find information about my book
on my website carla johnson.co
you can also find rethink innovation
anywhere that you buy
great books you can amazon barnes noble
hopefully some of your local bookstores
i'm a big fan of supporting local
bookstores
when you buy it
you can come to my website and click on
the book link and input your information
and i have some free bonuses for people
who have bought the book can get instant
access to all of those including one of
the free bonuses is a pdf of the book if
you want to start reading it right away
because i know some people some people
buy it or you know they want the print
copy but they want to see things right
away so they wonder about the kindle
versus prints so if you buy the print
actually if you buy the kindle too you
can get access to that right away and
start reading so people and can also
find you on social media channels as
well yes social media linkedin twitter
and instagram i'm carla johnson.co as
well there now just i'm going to ask one
silly question we talk about meditation
and then the question i'm going to ask
you is what kind of show are you binge
watching
what kind of show i am binge watching
community with my kids
oh my god i watched that twice back to
back to our power of observation is the
writing
very sure very punchy very quick you see
a little bit different archetypes in
each of those
well thank you so much for coming to my
show carla is wonderful to have you so
much appreciate that you spend so much
time looking to innovation and also the
different personality how we can do
and be innovative better on a regular
basis thank you it's always a joy and a
pleasure to talk to you thanks for
having me take care
bye-bye
never miss an episode of b2b marketing
and more by following us here on youtube
and leave a comment while you're at it
you can also find episodes wherever you
get your podcasts
[Music]